---
layout: post
title:  'D&D and an expanded theory of enshittification'
date:   2023-10-20 16:30:00 -0400
categories: 
published: true
---
I've been thinking a lot about [enshittification](https://www.wired.com/story/tiktok-platforms-cory-doctorow/) as a useful way to talk about how capitalism bears on communities. Cory Doctorow coined the term to describe how social media platforms go from dynamic and vibrant to exhausting and dessicated, but I think there is much more work the term can do.

In classical enshittification, firms create platforms, then need to extract value from them. That extraction is shifted among participants over the lifecycle of the platform. At first, it's absent in halcyon days when investors will accept IOUs of user growth. Next, free users are inundated with promoted content, then finally the promoters themselves find that relentless optimization and inscrutable algorithms make it impossible for them to profit from the platform. The platform enters a long-tail senescent phase, like a red giant running out the hydrogen clock, as network effects keep something alive that no one really enjoys.

It's immediately obvious is that social media platforms aren't the only thing being enshittified - the intuition is pervasive that these days many, most things are getting shittier. A concept this vivid and useful begs to be explored further.

Now, enshittification is _not_ about profit-driven firms making discrete goods or services shitty. The tension between quality and profit is older than capitalism, and in any case we have a few centuries of theory exploring why capitalists make goods the way they do.

What distiguishes enshittification from making shitty things is that it describes the process that unfolds when capitalist firms engage in a _direct, unmediated value-extraction relationship with a community or social space_. Provisionally, we can say that community can be an artificial one created by the firm (a social network), a real one (a neighborhood), or something in between (say, a fandom). When firms directly intervene in these social arrangements and attempt to valorize them, they tend to foist costs or penalties onto members - the arrangement gets shitty for some or all participants. This shittiness can include unpaid labor, decline in community quality, or being excluded from the community entirely.

It makes sense that Doctorow gives us enshittification in a moment when valorization of communities ("platform capitalism", gentrification, exhausted fandoms) is more and more a part of everyday life. _Everyone_ is a member of at least one, if not several or even dozens, of enshittifying communities. Some of these communities are decades old.

Consider the relationship between Dungeons & Dragons and TSR, and subsequently Wizards of the Coast (WotC, "wot-see"). No one, not even Gary Gygax, has ever "owned" the rules of D&D. The [recent kerfuffle over D&D licensing](https://www.npr.org/2023/01/25/1151474346/proposed-copyright-changes-have-dungeons-and-dragons-fans-up-in-arms) made it common knowledge that the rules of D&D are not copyrightable, and D&D has always been [the commonly-held inheritance of a gaming community](https://traversefantasy.blogspot.com/2022/05/wizards-hate-her-how-to-play-d-for-free.html). Nonetheless, TSR and WotC, profit-driven companies, have always played a crucial role in proselytizing the game and providing players the means to play, for a fee. Those players have been [debating for decades](https://grognardia.blogspot.com/2008/04/how-dragonlance-ruined-everything.html) about how commercial interests shape the game. 

[The excesses of the 3rd Edition](https://scholomance.substack.com/p/system-scorn-the-excesses-of-3rd) are a perfect example of our expanded concept of enshittification. WotC needs to extract value from the D&D community, which they do by selling dozens of [splatbooks](https://www.rpg.net/news+reviews/columns/edit11nov04.html) of additional rules and content on top of the already-ample base game. But this proliferation of new rules comes with a cost - an impossibly complex game. And this cost is borne by dungeon masters, who have to navigate this complexity to create a fun, compelling game; and by players, for whom the game becomes less about the collaborative navigation of a fantasy world and more about [min-maxing](https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/MinMaxing). This might even be advantageous to WotC in the medium term - when the rules can no longer support their own weight, WotC can declare bankruptcy (on the edition, not as a company) and introduce the next edition, which of course must be bought. For a couple of decades, it probably seemed like a sustainable cycle.

Fortunately, D&D never belonged to TSR or WotC. Its guise as a commodity has always been tenuous. It was and is the practice of a community, a collection of rules ("official" or "house"), a body of tradition. The explosion of interest in retroclones, "post-OSR", and so-called storygames, while still thoroughly commercialized, show a growing awareness among players that the enshittification of tabletop gaming doesn't have to be endured. They can play _their_ game blissfully ignorant of the incessant churn of "content" (that pejorative) spat out by for-profit publishers. If only every community had it that easy.
